# Finite Fields

This project is mostly finished but is still in progress.  The "Prime Field" works correctly but the general finite field uas some bugs.

Finite fields are an important mathematical construct.  They are used in some aspects of pure mathematics, like Group Theory.  More importantly they are used in cryptography.  The reason for this is that while finding a power (exponentiation) of an element is easy, it is difficult to impossible to calculate a finite logarithm for which the base is unknown in a reasonable amount of processing time (this may not be true for quantum computing).

Briefly, a finite field is a finite set of elements that are closed under all four arithmetic operations (Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division).  A typical finite field also has a zero(0) so that 0+x=x+0=x and 0*x = x*0 = 0 there is also a unit(1) so that 1*x=x*1 = x for all x in the field.  All of the usual commutative, associative and distributive laws apply.  Division by zero is forbidden and will cause an exception to be thrown.  

Computationally, Addition, Subtraction (vector addition mod(p)) are simple but Multiplicatiion and Division are somewhat tricky.  The order (number of elements) of a Finite Field is always p^n where p is a prime number and n is any positive integer.  The p^n elements are a complete set of vectors of dimension n over a field of order p.  In cryptography, one often chooses a large prime as a starting point.  There has also been some use of the Finite Field of order 2^6 =64.  The construction of non-prime order fields does require the use of an irreducible polynomial of degree n (irreducible in the sense that it cannot be solved over the field of order p) the coefficients of the polynomial must be in the "prime field", it generally chosen to be monic (all coeffients 0, +1 or -1) but this is not a requirement.  The construction of the multiplication and division tables do rely on this polynomial, although fields of the same order resulting from different polynomials are isomorphic and the specific tables look different.  All of the (non-zero) elements of the field are powers of a single element called the generator so that the field itself is cyclic under multiplication.  In some fields any element besides 0 and 1 can be a generator but in many this is not true (it depends if p^n-1 is prime or not).  If p is not a prime then no field can be constructed and an exception will be thrown.


There is a standard set of polynomials that are used for computing the multiplication and division tables, called the "Conway Polynomials", they are time consuming to compute and that is not done here.  There is a constructor that allows one to input any polynomial for the construction.  The blank constructor uses the polynomial x^n-x-1 which is irreducible for all p and all n>1.  (When p=2 there is not a minus sign and it is x^n+x+1 automatically since all addition is mod(2) in that case.)

All of the current versions of the various class files are included.  In order to use the PrimeField program one needs the PrimeField class, the two exception classes, the MathFields interface and the FiniteField test class.  I am ultimately interested in constructing matrices over finite fields.  The tools needed to do this will be part of the final FiniteFields class.  Note that the MathFields interface does not require any special properties for the operations so that it may be used to construct a division ring where multiplication is not cummutative.  This could be handy for describing matrices over a divison ring.  This could be handy for describing objects like the Octonians or Jordan Algebras, which are non-associative. 
