# IT2351 Enterprise Database Systems

This is a course in MYSQL.  This is a commonly used scripting language for creating and accessing a database. I'm including only the capstone project from the course which was to create a database along with some scripts for managing it.  I decided to create a database that contains genealogical information.  The files include the scripts for creating the database, and those which are needed to add an remove documents.  

The important things about genealogy is documenting the three main things:  Births, Marriages and Deaths.  The main table here is the "Persons" tables with secondary tables with the documented life occurences.  There will be another table added called "Families"  which is quite complicated because of the many-to-many relationships that it creates in the Persons table.  One of the difficulties about Genealogy is that there are no required data for any individual. The existence of a person may be deduced from the fact that we have a known person and they must have birth parents.  Nothing is known about the parents though.  Usually, the first thing that can be found is the name, but not even that may be found right away, for instance the birth date and location may be on a marriage record which should lead to the parents.  Each person has a unique ID number, this is generated when a person is added, it may be the only piece of data for that person.  Nothing else is required.  A parent's name may be listed on a marriage record but it may not be.  It could also be spelled wrong.  A person may even change the spelling of their name over the course of their life.  They may even change the name completely.

Adding a person to the persons table easily done with a simple MYSQL command.

The files uploaded are the scripts to create the database and to add documents.  There are two image files, one shows a screenshot of a query of the persons database enhanced with some Birth Data.  The other shows the EER diagram for the database.
