
# My Dissertation

The programs here are written in ANSI Standard Fortran-77.  There are two programs that are part of the project.  Basically, I start with a particular Schroedinger equation in three dimensions that separates in a Parabolic coordinate system.  The potential used is a combination of a particular anisotropic harmonic oscillator and a Coulomb potential.  The anisoptropy of the Harmonic Osillator is 2:1 where the oscillator frequency in the "z" direction is twice the frequency in the "x-y plane".  It is reasonable remarkable that this potential separates in these coordinates.  All of the eigenvalues are discrete.  There is a rotation symmetry around the "z" axis that leads to the usual angular momentum constant for rotations arond that axis.  There are two additional equations that arise from the separation.  All variables are dimensionless for ease of computation.

The separated equations are identical except for constants which are related to the eigenvalues and the strength of the Coulomb potential relative to the oscillator strength.  The eigenvalue equations cannot be solved using standard techniques that are used for finding eigenvalues of differential equations.  The main reason for this is the equations that result after the asymptotic behavior of the wave functions is factored out have a three term recurrence relation for the coefficient of the power series solution.

When the Coulomb potential is "switched off" the resulting problem is a pure harmonic oscillator.  It does also separate in cylindrical coordinates, the resulting solutions are Laguerre and Hermite Polynomials.  When separated in Parabolic coordinates the three-term recurrence relations still apply.  The solutions in Parabolic coordinates are linear combinations of the standard solutions in Cylindrical coordinates.  It is not complicated to find these linear combinations and that is not done here.

For each of the separated equations in Parabolic coordinates the resulting equations have two eigenvalues.  Since there are two equations the goal is to find pairs of eigenvalues that allow one to find pairs of functions that satisfy the boundary conditions. The two eigenvalues can be listed as the "Energy" (scaled to be dimensionless) and a second eigenvalue called $\kappa$ which is an eigenvalue of the "z-cpmponent" of a generalization of the "Lenz" vector for the Coulomb potential.  For the combined problem where the Coulomb potential is switched on there is at most a two-fold degeneracy of the energy eigenvalue.  For the pure oscillator case there is more energy degeneracy which may be uncovered by examining the separation in Cylindrical coordinates.  Of course, this degeneracy is coordinate independent.

The first program calculates the $\kappa$ eigenvalues for the pure oscillator case.  This could be done using standard routines for diagonalizing a tri-diagonal matrix.  Instead the recurrence relation is used to find values of the eigenvalues where the series terminates.  It terminates because the energies are oscillator energies, for a given energy the parabolic states are linear combinations of the cylindrical states for that energy.  The roots are found by adjusting the lambda values and looking for sign changes in the "last" coefficient.  When one is found the correct result can be zeroed in on.  The progam also calculates some results when the "Stark" term is non zero.  This term results from a uniform Electric Field in the "z" direction.  It does also find all $\kappa$ values corresponding to a specific energy.  Note that when a Stark term is present the energies are shifted but not split so that the energy degeneracies are the same as in the case with no Stark term.  The $\kappa$ values are not degenerate for different energies.  They are generally algebraic irrationals.  They have to terminate becuase there are a finite number of solutions for each energy and they are linear combinations of cylindrical wave functions.  It is not clear if there is another proof of this.

For the combined problem the infinite series do not terminate.  It's not hard to show that they do converge so that the resulting wave functions are finite.  The second program finds values of the two eigenvalues for which the resulting series do converge.  It uses the form of the equations where the behavior at the origin has been extracted (of the form x^n for n an integer that depends on the z-cponent of angular momentuem) but not the long distance behavior which is a Gaussian (because of the fact that the Harmonic Oscillator potential dominates at large distances).  It uses fourth order Runge-Kutta integration to integrate the equation starting at large distances and attempts to find a function where the derivative at the origin is zero.  Each pass changes the value of $\kappa$ until a suitable function is found and the eigenvalue pair is saved.  The result of this program is a set of curves in the eigenvalue plane where the integrated function satisfies the boundary conditions.  One of the complications of the program is that between every pair of curves where the derivative is zero at the origin is a curve where it is infinite.  These ininities correspond to "irregular" solutions of the equation.

There is a third program which is not included here.  It takes the data files produced by the second program and produces graphs that show the curves.  Energy is measured vertically and $\kappa$ is measured horizontally.  To find the solutions one takes curves that are moving upward and flip them over to find curves that move downwards.  The combined eigenvalues are where a set of upward and downward moving curves cross.  Calculating the crossings is quite challenging becuase of the infinities mentioned above.  I've included some images that illustrate the crossings with zero z-compnent of angular momentum.  All of the programs were originally run on a DEC PRO-350 computer.  The second program, especially, took days of CPU time to process.  Doing much more would have taken considerably longer.  With more modern computers it would be much faster and more could have been done.

There are some graphs included here.  Some explanation is required.  Basically J = 2m+N-1 where m is the "z" compoent of angular momentum and N is the number of spatial dimensions.  The lowest angular momentum states in three dimen then have J=2.  I've also included the J=1 states which are correspond to the two dimensional problem.  

There are five graphs for each J value.  They are labelled by the greek letter $\nu$ which is the relative strength of the coulomb potential with respect to the oscillator strength.  For positive values of $\nu$ the Coulomb potential is repulsive while it is attractive when $\nu$ is negative.

The last graph shows an interesting thing that occurs.  It shows the general curves relating the eigenvalues in the two-dimensional case.  There are two curves, they are distinguished by whether the wave function changes sign on reflections (parity).  Note that there is a degneracy between them for large negative values of $\kappa$.  T
<pre>
Graph Number             J             nu
1                        2             0
2                        2             +1
3                        2             +2
4                        2             -1
5                        2             -2
6                        1              0
7                        1             +1
8                        1             +2
9                        1             -1
10                       1             -2
11                  Degeneracy of curves in two dimensions.
</pre>
